# Introduction to data

What is data? Is it different from information? How would you answer these
questions?

_**Data**_ can be defined as "facts about something that can be used in
calculating, reasoning, or planning" [^mw-data]. Although some use "data" and
"information" interchangeably, data scientists often consider information to
be _interpreted_ data, or data in a specific context with implicit meaning. The
word "data" is traditionally a plural (the singular is "datum"), but modernly
data is sometimes used in singular form as well.[^mw-data]

[^mw-data]: _Merriam-Webster.com_, ["data"](https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/data)

Similarly, _**metadata**_ are "data information that provides information about
other data" [^wiki-metadata]. Metadata might be descriptive data, or describe
the structure or characteristics of the data. For example, if the text of a book
were considered data, the title, author, year of publication and city of
publication might be considered descriptive metadata. Metadata can be considered
data in its own right, and have its own metadata. To continue the book example,
we might describe a book's title as a string of characters, the author as a list
of people (even if the list is only one person long), the publication year as a
date, and the place of publication as a geographic location. These are all
structural constraints on the data that can be used to verify the data.

[^wiki-metadata]:_Wikipedia_, [“Metadata”](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Metadata)

Politicians and governments have used the phrase "metadata" to make their data
collection efforts seem less threatening. In 2013, an National Security Agency
(NSA) contractor named Edward Snowden released government documents
detailing secret programs to track internet and telephone communications by
foreign nationals.[^wiki-snowden] Representatives of the NSA claimed that
because only "metadata" was being collected, the collection was innocuous. The
NSA collected, for example, how often two people talked, and when, but claimed
to---in most cases---not record the content of telephone calls of citizens.

Yet, metadata is still data! Researchers later demonstrated that simply by
collecting metadata, they could effectively map social networks and identify
conspirators.[^revere]

[^revere]: Perhaps the most interesting of these was by Kieran Healy, who wrote
["Using Metadata to Find Paul Revere"][revere-link], a fictional account of what
might had happed had the British applied modern social network analysis during
the American Revolution. (See also, ["The Other Ride of Paul Revere: The brokerage role in the making of the American Revolution" \[pdf\]][revere-han] (2009), Shin-Kap Han, _Mobilization: An International Quarterly 14_(2): 143-162)

[revere-link]: https://kieranhealy.org/blog/archives/2013/06/09/using-metadata-to-find-paul-revere/
[revere-han]: http://www.sscnet.ucla.edu/polisci/faculty/chwe/ps269/han.pdf

Although the NSA's data collection program was ruled unconstitutional in 2015
(_ACLU v. Clapper_), a revised version was approved by Congress a few months
later, with some modifications. The data collection continues today. In 2017,
the NSA reportedly collected 534 million records of phone calls and text messages from American telecommunications providers like AT&T and Verizon, more than triple what it collected the year before [^nsa-nyt].

<!-- TODO: More on the data collection by Google, Facebook, et al. Perhaps Cambrige Analytics -->

[^nsa-nyt]: ["N.S.A. Triples Collection of Data From U.S. Phone Companies"][nsa-nyt-link], Charlie Savage, _The New York Times_, May 4, 2018.

[nsa-nyt-link]: https://www.nytimes.com/2018/05/04/us/politics/nsa-surveillance-2017-annual-report.html

*[NSA]: National Security Agency

[^wiki-snowden]: _Wikipedia_, [Edward Snowden](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Edward_Snowden)

## Characteristics of data

What makes some data better than other data? Researchers still debate the best
way to describe data, but the following characteristics[^watson] are useful:

* **Shareable:** Readily accessed by more than one person at a time
* **Transportable:** Easily moved to a decision maker
* **Secure:** Protected from destruction and unauthorized use
* **Accurate:** Reliable, precise records
* **Timely:** Current and up-to-date
* **Relevant:** Appropriate to the decision

[^watson]: Watson, Richard (2016-10-19). _<cite>Data Management (6th ed.)</cite>_. eGreen Press.

These characteristics can be broken down and categorized further:

* **Usability**
    - Relevant, fitness for a purpose
    - Simple, easy to use
    - Flexible, easy to manipulate structurally
    - Economical, brief, but useful
* **Quality**
    - Accurate, correctness
    - Verifiable, can be confirmed by other sources
    - Complete, without missing parts
    - Reliable, the same answer will be returned on repeated queries
* **Delivery**
    - Timely, recent, up-to-date
    - Accessible, can be accessed easily,
    - Available, can be accessed by many people
    - Secure, cannot be modified or stolen

Admittedly, some of these may overlap. We could go further and describe whether a chunk of data is owned by a person or company, or subject to usage constraints, whether legal or technological. Issues of data ownership and privacy are subjects of significant concern in modern business. We could discuss attributes of data storage systems (whether data are centralized or decentralized, backed up, duplicated, etc.), business risks for loss of

This certainly isn't a complete list of how we might describe data, but considering characteristics like these help give us a consistent way to grade and compare data.

<!-- TODO: More on the data triad (Khatri), and Information Systems Lifecycle (Watson) [moved to 2.2] -->
<!-- TODO:  Data silos are revealed as an organization grows. -->

## Additional Reading

* ["How Paul Revere could have been outed as a 'terrorist' by metadata"][revere-wsj], Andrea Peterson, _<cite>Washington Post</cite>_, January 17, 2014.
* Vijay Khatri, ["Managerial work in the realm of the digital universe: The role of the data triad"][triad-journal], _<cite>Business Horizons (59:6)</cite>_, November–December 2016, pp 673-688. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bushor.2016.06.001

[revere-wsj]: https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/the-switch/wp/2014/01/17/how-paul-revere-could-have-been-outed-as-a-terrorist-by-metadata/
[triad-journal]: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0007681316300519

## Review

1. What is data?
2. What is the between data and information?
3. What is the difference between data and metadata?
4. Which characteristics do you think are most useful for describing data?
5. What is the difference between data-in-motion and data-at-rest?

<!-- ## Exercises

1. Describe a university class using XML.
2. Describe a university class using JSON. -->
